houseospank.com 11/2001

30.11.2001 Обзор (Gothic | By: Zee Nov. 30, 2001 at 21:13 |)

Welcome to the world of Gothic. War has decimated the land, Orc Hordes are invading human territory and the king of the land needs a lot of ore to forge enough weapons for his army to stand against this threat. Prisoners from all over the empire are imprisoned in a large magical sphere where they have to work in the mines for the king. You are thrown into the sphere to give a letter to the high mages, this letter may be the turning point on the war against the Orcs. Check out our review and screenshot gallery.

Gothic

Introduction

Click for more screensI'll start by confessing to you all first. I am not an RPG fan, in fact in my 10+ years of gaming I can count the number of RPG's I've played and enjoyed on one hand. And I'd still have a few fingers to spare. It's not to say I don't play them, hell I've tried most of the "great" ones. I just rarely like them, RPG's just don't seem to do it for me. When this game arrived I looked at it and said, "Ohhh...a RPG....blah". Luckily for us though, this game has me singing another tune now. And my fiance would have to agree, considering all the hours she's seen me log in this game. There have been a lot of RPG's released in the last year but most of them seem to have gone the MMORPG route. This isn't a bad thing mind you, just not everyone is interested (or can afford) to play games like these. It's nice to see a game like Gothic come along, going back to the traditional roots of RPG's. Though sometimes you might swear you're playing online by how the NPC's interact with you and the other inhabitants. Right from the get go this game sucks the player in and keeps you compelled to push onward. Onward towards what? Well (and this is the part I love most) that's up to you. The game is completely non-linear and there are countless things you can do. Of course there are some that you have to do in order to trigger certain events within the game. For example, to join the "Old Camp" you'll need to do a few tasks to prove to the powers that be that you are worthy of joining. Then again who says you have to join the "Old Camp"? There are 3 camps within the world that you can join. You can visit each and talk to the people, learn their ways, make friends, help people out, gain experience / items / ore, you don't have to join a camp right away. In fact not joining a camp right away is a smart move. Some people need certain things done by outsiders and the rewards for doing so are well worth it. There is so much to do in the game world, you'll often find yourself trying to decide which task to undertake first. The story is very well done and it pulls the player right into the world. You'll feel like you're part of the world. The people within the world all do real life things, they have jobs, they sleep, they eat and they party to. Heck, the "Brotherhood" even enjoy smoking swampweed! (lol) The AI is for the most part very good, there are occassional "glitches" but nothing major. Another very cool feature of the AI is the people within the world all have a distinct memory. This means if you piss someone off he's gonna remember that later on, and on top of that any of his friends he tells will remember it too. For example, I got in a fight with a fellow from the brotherhood while at the "Old Camp" and well..I killed him. After that a lot of the people in the "Old Camp" who were friendly with the bortherhood wouldn't talk to me, some outright hated me and beat the hell out of me. (not to mention stole my loot!). And well the brotherhood...let's just say once word got around their camp, it wasn't really a good place for me to show my face. It really makes the player think, you have to be careful not to burn too many bridges otherwise you'll find yourself in trouble. You'll definately make enemies throughout the game, but one also has to make sure they make the right allies as well. The game is full of suprises, which is very welcomed by this reviewer. I love nothing more than when a game makes me sit back and say, "Wow! That was cool!". I don't want to give things away, but some people may play through the game once and not see any of what I've seen. It all depends on the choices the player makes, and the actions he/she takes. The game has multiple endings thus giving it high replay value.

Graphics

Click for more screensThe graphics in this game are beautiful. Simply put, if your system has the muscle you won't be disappointed. In fact I'll bet you'll be pretty damned impressed. Don't fear though, the graphics are scaleable so if you have a lower end system you'll still be able to run the game. You're going to miss out on some really nice graphics and detail though. I don't know if I'd recommend anything less than the "Required Specs", going lower than that will probably be pushing it. Right from the start you'll see that a lot of time was spent on the graphics. They took this engine and really transformed it into a living, breathing, world. There's so much detail you'll be awe struck at times. From falling leaves, to weather, night and day, it all adds up to a fully believable game world. When the sun goes down and you find yourself in the woods, with a pack of wolves howling nearby, you're going to wish you'd stayed at camp by the warm fire. (lol) Actually the night and day add a lot to the gameplay, at night it's harder to see creatures out in the wild as well some, like the wolves, are more agressive at night. I really like the lighting effects in the game, a camp fire actually seems to glow and light up the surrounding area. If you've got everything cranked (and a system that can handle it) you're in for a treat. The animated sky effects are amazing. During your journey's throughout the world you'll come across many beautiful, panoramic views. We're talking post card quality here. Overall the engine is great and the world really feels alive and..well...real. Oh...did I mention the game world is HUGE? Umm..yeah it is, get a map, whether you have to pay for it, steal it, or beat it out of the seller's hands, just get one! There are a few flaws though. Occassionally there are some rips / tears in the world, but these are very few and far between. Also there are some clipping problems, usually when you jump off something, your character will fall into the ground a bit for a few seconds. Another thing I noticed was the colors of the world are a little drab, and some textures are overused a bit. Of course none of these problems are all that bad and they don't affect the game, you'll probably not even notice any of it.

Sound

Click for more screensAside from gameplay and graphics what could be more important? Well actually I feel that sound is a very important part of any game, especially a game of this genere. The sounds and music in this game are top notch. The entire world is filled with more ambient sound than you can shake a stoneroot at! It seems as if every object within the game that should produce an ambient sound, does. And it's done well, done so that it doesn't detract from the game. Sounds fade in and out as you get closer and farther from the source. If you come across a camp fire with a pot of water boiling, as you get closer you'll hear the fire crackling, and once you're right beside it you'll even hear the water boiling. Passing people allows you to sometimes catch bits of their conversations, which is incredibly helpful, as you never know, you might just overhear something very useful. The music in the game is very suiting for the game's theme, and it will change according to what's happening. Coming into a camp your ears will be filled with soft, mellow melodies, while being chased by goblins will bring about some heart pounding music that will surely get you in the mood for a run. The voice acting is done quite well, and to me it seems better than most games. What I mean is that the voices, as well as the actual conversations, are actually believable. I really don't have any complaints with the sound or music in this game.

Gameplay

Click for more screensOk, there is one problem with this game, and it directly affects the gameplay, so I am going to get it out in the open now. The controls....man...these bothered me to no end at first. They are confusing and akward to begin with. At times the response is sluggish (pulling a weapon). Now before you all run away let me say that the game is "playable" but it does take a little getting used to the control system. After a few hours you'll have it memorized and it won't be a problem. The thing about it that annoys me is I know there could have been a better setup, the controls could have been implemented in a more user friendly way. Like I say though once you get used to the controls you'll be ok. Now that I got that out of the way, let's get into the gameplay. It's great! As you play you find that you feel like you are part of this world. The one thing I really like is there is no set character classes. As you kill creatures, complete tasks, etc, you gain experience and skill points. Your skill points can be spent on the skills you choose. All you do is find someone that can teach you something, then if you have enough skill points (and sometimes you need money as well) you can learn that skill. Skills range from common skills such as strength, dexterity, etc to more focused skills such as theivery and magic. How you build your character is up to you. There are some skills that appear to be useless, such as hunting skills (skinning, declawing, detoothing, etc) but in fact they are a great benefit to you. Once you've learned how to skin animals then you can take the fur of some animals you kill which in turn can be traded for money or goods. Same with the claws and teeth. Some skills are just plain fun as well, like lock picking and pick pocketing. I've focused my character on theivery and it's a lot of fun going through the camps looting people's pockets. Just don't get caught! (remember the memory thing lol) As far as weapons, spells and items go there are hundreds of them to choose from. Combat is done in real time, and it's a lot of fun. Though in the beginning you'd be wise to pick your fights carefully (if at all) as you're not all that strong and you lack skill. At times the combat can be a little tricky, especially with faster moving foes, but overall it's relatively simple and fun. The focus, when it comes to fighting, is on action. One thing I can't stress enough is save often! You never know when a "sure" fight is going to turn sour, and if you haven't saved for a while you'll find yourself doing it all over again. As well if you're just not sure of how something may turn out save your game in an empty slot so you can fall back on an older save if it doesn't go the way you wanted it to. As I mentioned before the game is non-linear, has multiple endings, and 100+ hours of gameplay. This all adds up to a great gaming experience as well as a game with some high replay value.

Multiplayer

Click for more screensNo multiplayer here. That isn't a bad thing really. In my opinion with the slew of online RPG's we've been seeing lately it's nice to have an old fashioned RPG to play. And with a story and plot like the one Gothic offers you probably won't even notice you're not online.

Conclusion

Click for more screensIn conclusion I'd have to say this is a game you do not want to miss out on. It's an incredibly immersive gaming experience. It's a game I think die hard RPG fans will love and a game that might even make fans out of people who never thought they could love an RPG. A lot of hard work went into this game and it shows in all aspects. (aside from the controls, which I feel could have been made more user friendly) If you're looking for a game that will suck you in with an incredible story, breathtaking graphics and gameplay that keeps you up well into the early morning hours then this is a game you'll want to check out. The 100+ hours of gameplay, the sheer amount of weapons, items, spells and skills, the non-linear approach with multiple endings, it all adds up to something you don't want to miss out on. I highly recommend this game for everyone.
