intelgamer.com 10/2001
11.10.2001

Previews
Gothic
by Minx - 10/11/2001

Publisher: Xicat Interactive
Developer: Piranha Bytes
Release: 11/15/2001
Purchase: Not yet


After playing many RPG’s, it sometimes feels as if I am revisiting old friends when trying out a new game. Let’s face it, the basics for all fantasy RPGs are the same: Swords and Sorcery, Quests, looting, and dealing in different levels of NPCs are the fundamentals. Depending on how much time goes into creating the quests, how much energy is spent on developing the characters, and just how diverse those characters are either makes or breaks the game.

I have to admit I was taken by surprise by Gothic’s twist on an old genre. You start out as the new kid on the block in a prison vortex where animate objects can come in…but they don’t get out. The prisoners are sent in to mine the fields for ore and have managed to get the upper hand. The Emperor sends what the prisoners want into the vortex as long as the ore keeps coming to fund his wars. In short, you know nothing, have no skills, and are in possession of a letter that most the inmates would gladly relieve you of while slitting your throat.

Your job is to figure out whom to trust, get close and personal with those in power, and get into the castle to deliver this letter to the mages. Sound easy? Oh, did I forget to mention the small fact there are three camps involved; one a religiously fanatical camp, the other a new upshot camp of bloodthirsty cutthroats and murderers, and the final the Old Camp where the “guards” (prisoners who have managed to get status inside) are bribable with something you have none of…the all precious ore? Let’s toss in this mix how you don’t even have the basic skills such as hunting or fighting…and well you get the bigger picture.

I enjoyed tremendously playing this game. It reminded me in ways of Ultima Online, where you have to work at a skill to gain it. You gain prestige with those in power by completing certain tasks…these tasks also level you and allow you to gain vital survival skills. You have to think quickly, act carefully, and SAVE OFTEN. The communication menus are not cut and dried, as some of the information you will receive is worthless. Choose wisely what you ask, or you may find yourself ticking off the wrong characters, which can lead to a harder game. The NPC’s remember what you have asked and can get irritated with being asked the same question too many times.

The combat is action orientated, where you control it in third person. As you gain experience you gain faster combat and better movement. I am not sure if this is related to my getting used to the controls or if it was written into the program. The more you use your combat, the harder creatures you can take on. It was humiliating to have a baby herder kill me at first. Kind of like going after a chicken for dinner only ending up pecked to death. After a few times of finally winning the battle and having my ego back intact, I find out from one of the NPC’s I have been wasting precious meat. Now they tell me!

The game controls are simpler than I expected, where even a novice to RPG can easily figure out what they need to do. The only complaint I had with the setup would be there is no game map in the beginning to refer to. Not until you buy one from a cranky character. However this does fit with the rest of the gaming format here…once more you have to earn the privilege to know where you are.

The graphics are cubical but rich, with the freedom of movement many RPG’s do not give you. You can climb hills, over fallen trees, up house sides, even through shrubbery. The paths are not locked into place, so you can find yourself far off the wanted trail if you are not careful. I enjoyed playing hide and seek with an NPC that latched onto me in the game. But since I don’t want to ruin the plot, you figure out how to get rid of him on your own if you want to. Or keep him around to annoy you. It’s your call. The time frame also goes through days and nights slowly. As the sun moves through the sky the game gradually gets brighter and then darker towards night.

Currently I am frustrated. After playing the demo I really would LOVE to play the entire game. It was major frustration to hit those barriers and realize I could not do the quests mentioned by the NPC’s. (OK I’m begging for a copy of the game to do a full review…sue me...)
