gamersuplink.com 10/2001

03.10.2001

Gothic Preview
Previewed by: Cherry

Format: PC
Publisher: Piranha-Bytes
Release Date: November 15, 2001
Storage: CD-ROM

It's pretty rare these days for game companies to risk breaking out of the standard genre molds and try something unique. I played the demo (a whopping 270 MB I might add) of Piranha Bytes' Gothic and was given the opportunity to ask questions of Executive Producer Torsten Dinkheller. I'm not sure if the game is totally new but the vision of the designers is certainly daunting in its depth and complexity. Gothic is basically an action oriented RPG, but I doubt you've seen any game quite like this one.
The story begins with you being tossed off a cliff down into a vast prison area. The only barrier is one set up by magicians many years ago. Humans can get in, but if they try to escape the barrier they are killed. You are to be imprisoned there. Soon after you arrive you have a rather unpleasant encounter with some of your fellow inmates. One man fends off those who attack you and invites you to meet his leader, back in his camp.

There are three camps dwelling within the prison. One is made up primarily of fighters and thieves. They still have dealings with the outside world, which craves the ore that can be mined in the tunnels. Another camp consists of mystics who pray to the Sleeper to bring them deliverance from their fates. Mages who are continually striving to blast their way through the prison's energy wall make up the last camp.

The world within the prison is quite large. It took me a good five to ten minutes of walking just to reach the Old Camp. There is an assortment of wildlife about, from the weak junior scavenger to great wasp-like creatures that kept killing me so fast I didn't have the chance to get their names down. The first humans I met were hunters, and promised to teach me their secrets for a certain amount of skill credits or ore. In the Old Camp I ended up trying to join the Shadows, which are new recruits for the Old Camp's forces. A man named Fingers offered to teach me the tricks of thievery and lock picking for a price similar to that named by the hunters.

Gothic has a stunning graphical appearance. The character models are large and nicely defined. The sky is incredible to look at, whether eerie electrical storms play across it or you are merely gazing at the pale night moon. The music is perfectly suited to the gameplay. It menaces with thudding drumbeats when you are outside and near danger, and it blends amiably in the background with a faint medieval theme when you are chatting within the safety of the camps. The voice acting is also quite well done.

The amazing thing about this game is the sheer scope of it. There are so many skills to learn that it could conceivably take you months to master them all, if that's possible within the timeframe of the game. You can learn the craft of the hunter, including skinning the hides of your prey and removing their teeth. Various kinds of weapons are available for you to learn to use. I carried both a sword and a pickaxe, and noticed NPCs using bows. Lockpick and stealth can be learned, as well as various kinds of magic. Also, your appearance changes as you age in varying ways, depending on different choices you make.

The AI of other characters (NPC's) is very believable and well done. I wandered into a building to check it out only to have the owner run in and threaten me. I ran out and he left me unharmed, but I fear he would have attacked me had I stayed. Torsten Dinkheller says that at times the behavior of the NPCs has surprised even him. "I was showing Gothic at the ECTS in London and I tried to give an example of our news system. The news system allows friends of NPCs to know news only if they meet a person with . . . information. Therefore I inserted a sword (cheat), but before I could attack anyone a NPC came over and 'asked' me for his sword. The sword I inserted was the one of the NPC. Once I gave it to him he let me go with the words, 'That was just in time.'"

According to Mr. Dinkheller, the game may take as long as 90 hours for a beginner to finish, with the best on his team having completed the basic storyline in 45 hours. The ending of the story is still a mystery. My question about whether one is ever able to escape the prison was met only with a smile. A sequel to Gothic is definitely being planned, however, so I am assuming the protagonist from the original survives. I will be looking forward to getting my hands on a finished copy of this one around November 15th, when Torsten Dinkheller informed me the game should be released. This is one unique RPG that has the potential to be a fun and engrossing game.
