rpgdot.com 01/2000


ad personam
Stefan Nyul
(Gothic / Piranha Bytes)

Name: Stefan Nyul
Position: Producer - Piranha Bytes
Age: ??

1) How did you get into the gaming industry?

I was aquired by an gaming industry professional, who stumbled over a shareware game of mine in the Mouse-Net, an old mailbox net. He offered me a job as script writer. Soon I joined Greenwood Entertainment, a German game developer as script writer and project manager.

2) Best bit of advice you have ever got?

Have an extra pair of gloves for "handling" each human being.

3) If you were not making games, you would be....?

I would have continued being an engineering officer in the German Airforce.

4) Something you are very proud of?

No employee ever left our company because he was unconfident with the team!

5) Which games are you playing right now?

Ultima Online, Ultima 9, Nomad Soul.

6) What is your favorite RPG?

The classical Ultima series 1-7. And of course Ultima Online. I also like Baldurs Gate, and was totally fascinated by both Fallout episodes.

7) Where do you think the future of CRPGs lies?

Online and Mainstream. Online, because involving REAL human characters can hardly be beaten by AI. Mainstream, because the traditonally/classical CRPGis to complex to fascinate huge numbers of players. Even hardcore-CRPG-players will love the easy-to-handle-and-yet-full-depth-CRPGs of the next generation. Also read Warren Spectors articles in the Game Developers Magazine about CRPGs!

8 )If you were living in the time period where your game is set, what would you have been?

A dubious sorcerer or a honorable paladin.

9) You wish you would never have played this game named .... because it ...?

I've never played bad titles long enough, to regret doing so. But I hate CRPGs that change save game formats with patches, so that I have to start from the scratch. Fallout did this, but is a splendid game anyway.

10) Which book are you reading?

The sixth novel of the "Honor Harrington"-space saga. Hey, if you love ancient sea battles under sails and like the "Horatio Hornblower"-novels, you HAVE TO read "Honor Harrington".

11) Last movie you saw? And did you like it?

"Jean of Arc" from Luc Besson. I like the "Joan D'Arc"-story and so this movie has been an obligation to watch. I like the critcal view on the "godly" nature of Joan's mission.

12) What music do you listen to/are currently listening to?

Movie sound tracks, rock classics, musicals, dixie, irish folk.

13) Favorite non game related pastime?

Meeting with good old friends.

14) You can't live without?

My girl friend, computer games, good food.

15) Don't you hate....?

Violence, arrogance, ignorance and other traits, live would be so easy without.

16) Your favorite joke? C'mon, share it with us :-)

Not especially a joke, but a serious quote of Albert Einstein: "No one knows, what will be the weapons in World War III. But I know what will be the weapons in World War IV: clubs and spears!".